# Algebraic Background for Homology

## Abelian Group

An abelian group is a group $(G, +)$ such that $\forall a, b \in G$, $a+b = b+a$

### Direct Product and Direct Sum

1. The direct product of two abelian groups $(G, +)$ and $(H, +)$ is

$$
(G \times H, +)
$$

where
$$
G \times H = \{(g, h)| g \in G, h \in H\}
$$
and 
$$
\forall (g_1, h_1), (g_2, h_2) \in G\times H\\
(g_1, h_1) + (g_2, h_2) = (g_1 + g_2, h_1 + h_2)
$$
Generally, consider a group of abelian groups $((G_\alpha, +))_{I_\alpha}$, their direct product is $(\prod_{I_\alpha}G_{\alpha}, +)$ where
$$
\prod_{I_\alpha}G = \{(g_\alpha)_{I_\alpha}| g_\alpha \in G_\alpha \forall \alpha \in I_\alpha\}
$$
and 
$$
\forall (g_\alpha), (h_\alpha) \in \prod_{I_\alpha}G\\
(g_\alpha) + (h_\alpha) = (g_\alpha + h_\alpha)
$$

2. The external direct sum $(\bigoplus_{\alpha \in I_\alpha}G_\alpha, +)$ of a family of an abelian group is defined as the following, where

$$
\bigoplus_{\alpha \in I_\alpha}G_\alpha = \{(g_\alpha), \forall \alpha \in I, \text{where there are only finity $g_\alpha$ non-zero}\}
$$

Basically, the external direct sum of a family of groups is a subgroup of the direct product of the family of groups. Their computation law $+$ Are same. As for a finite family of groups, the direct product is the same as the external direct sum.

3. Let $G$ be an abelian group and $\{G_\alpha\}$ It is a family of its subgroups. if $\forall g \in G$
   $$
   g = \sum_{\alpha}g_\alpha
   $$
   

   then we call $G$ the internal direct sum of $\{G_\alpha\}$, where each $g_\alpha \in G_\alpha$ in this case, we write 

   
   $$
   G = \bigoplus_{\alpha \in I_\alpha}G_\alpha
   $$

The following result explains why we can use the same notation for both an abelian group's internal and external sum.

4. If $G$ is an abelian group and $G = \bigoplus_\alpha G_\alpha$ is the internal direct sum decomposition, the following map is an isomorphism
   $$
   \forall g \in G, g = \sum_{\alpha}g_\alpha \mapsto (g_\alpha)_{\alpha \in I_\alpha}
   $$
   conversely, given a family of groups $\{G_\alpha\}$, and $G = \bigoplus_{\alpha}G_\alpha$ is the external direct sum, denote, $\iota_\alpha: G_\alpha \rightarrow \bigoplus_{\alpha}G_\alpha$ be the canonical inclusion
   $$
   g_\alpha \mapsto \iota_\alpha(g_\alpha) = h_\beta = 
   \begin{cases}
   g_\alpha \quad \text{if $\alpha = \beta$}\\
   0 \quad \text{otherwise}
   \end{cases}
   $$
   We denote $G_\alpha' = \iota_\alpha(G_\alpha)$ which is the subgroup of $\bigoplus_\alpha G_\alpha = G$, and $G$ is also the internal direct sum of $G_\alpha'$ by defining the following isomorphism
   $$
   g \mapsto \sum_\alpha \iota_\alpha(\pi_\alpha(g))
   $$
   where $\pi_\alpha$ is the projection from $g$  to its $\alpha$-th components.

5. Then we define homomorphism. Let $G, H$ be two abelian groups, the homomorphism $(\text{Hom}(G, H), +)$ between them is also a group, where
   $$
   \text{Hom}(G, H) = \{f : G \rightarrow H| \text{$f$ is a group homomorphism}\}\\
   +: \text{Hom}(G, H) \times \text{Hom}(G, H) \rightarrow \text{Hom}(G, H): (\phi, \psi) \mapsto \phi + \psi
   $$
   for every $g$
   $$
   (\phi + \psi)(g) := \phi(g) + \phi(g)
   $$
   We can also construct an isomorphism.
   $$
   \phi: \text{Hom}(\bigoplus_\alpha G_\alpha, H) \cong \prod_\alpha\text{Hom}(G_\alpha, H)
   $$
   where for each $f \in \text{Hom}(\bigoplus_\alpha G_\alpha, H)$, 
   $$
   \phi(f) := (f\circ \iota_\alpha)_{\alpha \in I_\alpha}
   $$
   Similarly, we have
   $$
   \text{Hom}(H, \bigoplus_\alpha G_\alpha) \cong \prod_\alpha\text{Hom}(H, G_\alpha)
   $$

### Free Abelian Group

6. Let $(G, +)$ be an abelian group; it is a free abelian group if there is a family of elements $\{g_\alpha\}$ Becomes the basis of the group. That is 
   $$
   \forall g \in G, \exists ! n_\alpha \in \mathbb{Z} \quad \text{for each $\alpha$ such that} \\
   g = \sum_\alpha n_\alpha g_\alpha
   $$
   where there are only finite nonzero $n_\alpha$. In other words, $G$ can be written as the internal direct sum of the cyclic group generated by each element in the basis. That is
   $$
   G = \bigoplus_{\alpha}<g_\alpha>
   $$
   Conversely, if there is a family of infinite cyclic groups. $<g_\alpha>, \alpha \in I_\alpha$ such that
   $$
   G = \bigoplus_{\alpha}<g_\alpha>
   $$
   Then $G$ is a free abelian group generated by $\{g_\alpha\}$.

7. Given $G$ an abelian group, the following statements are equivalent

   1. $G$ is a free abelian group.
   2. $G$ is the internal direct sum of some infinite cyclic groups.
   3. $G$ is isomorphic to the external direct sum of some integer group $\bigoplus_\alpha\mathbb{Z}$.

## Free Abelian Group Generated by a Set

1. For any set $S$, it can generate a free abelian group $Z$
   $$
   Z = \{\sum_{x \in S}n_x x| n_x \in \mathbb{Z}, \text{There are only finite many nonzero element $n_x$}\}
   $$
   Rigorously, we can define $(Z, +)$ as
   $$
   Z := \{f: S \rightarrow \mathbb{Z}| \text{there are only finit $x \in S$ such that $f(x) \neq 0$}\}
   $$

   $$
   +: Z \times Z \rightarrow Z: (f, g) \mapsto f + g
   $$

   The basis of $Z$ is written as $\{\phi_x\}$ which is an indicator function of $x \in S$
   $$
   \phi_x: S \rightarrow Z: y \mapsto \phi_x(y) = 
   \begin{cases}
   1, y = x\\
   0, y \neq x
   \end{cases}
   $$
   Therefore, for each $f \in Z$, 
   $$
   f = \sum_{x \in S} f(x) \phi_x
   $$
   mostly, we use the notation $\sum_{x \in S}n_x x$  as $\sum_{x \in S} f(x)\phi_x$

### Universal Property of $Z$

2. if $\iota: S \rightarrow Z$ is a canonical inclusion $x \mapsto \phi_x$, then for any abelian group $H$ and $f: S \rightarrow H$. There is a unique group homomorphism $\tilde{f} : Z \rightarrow H$ where $\tilde{f}\circ \iota = f$. We can construct $\tilde{f}$ as 
   $$
   \tilde{f}(\sum_x n_x x) := \sum_{x \in S} n_x f(x)
   $$
   Let $Z'$ be another abelian group, $\iota': S \rightarrow Z$ is a mapping satisfying that for any abelian group $H$, $f: S \rightarrow H$, there is a unique group homomorphism $\tilde{f}: Z' \rightarrow H$ such that 
   $$
   \tilde{f}\circ\iota' = f
   $$
   Then $Z' = Z$

3. All the basis of a free abelian group have the same cardinality

4. We can call the cardinality of any basis of a free abelian group the rank of $G$

## Abelian Groups That are not Free

1. Let $G$ be an abelian group, then the order of an element $g \in G$  being finite means $\exist n \in \mathbb{Z}$ such that 
   $$
   ng = 0
   $$
   Denote
   $$
   T = \{g \in G| \text{$g$ has finite order}\}
   $$
   Then $T$  is a subgroup of $G$, we call $T$ the torsion subgroup. If $T = 0$ , we say $G$ is torsion-free.

2. Notice that if $G$ is a free abelian group then $G$ is torsion-free, however, $G$ being torsion-free doesn't mean $G$ is a free abelian group. i.e.$(\mathbb{Q}, +)$.

### Classification of Finite Generated Abelian Group

1. Finite generated abelian groups $G$ are the abelian groups having a finite basis, say $\{g_1, \dots, g_n\}$. It is natural to ask for its relation with the external direct sum of $n$-integers sets. Because both seem to be generated by $n$-generator independently.

$$
F = \mathbb{Z}\oplus\mathbb{Z}\oplus\cdots\oplus\mathbb{Z}
$$

​		It is clear to see that we can have a surjective homomorphism 
$$
\phi: F \rightarrow G, \quad e_i = (0, \dots, 0, 1, 0, \dots, 0) \mapsto g_i
$$
​		By denoting $K = \ker{\phi}$, which is also a finite generating abelian group, then
$$
G \cong F/K
$$
​		More specifically, we have the following theorem:

​		Let $G$ be a finite generated abelian group, then either $G$ is a free abelian group or there exists a 		collection of positive integers $m_1|m_2|\dots|m_t$ and a unique non-negative integer $s$ such that
$$
G \cong \mathbb{Z}/m_1\mathbb{Z}\oplus\mathbb{Z}/m_2\mathbb{Z}\oplus\cdots\oplus\mathbb{Z}/m_t\oplus\underbrace{\mathbb{Z}\oplus\cdots\oplus\mathbb{Z}}_{\text{there are $s-\mathbb{Z}$}}
$$

2. Let $m$ be an integer, $m = p_1^{n_1}\cdots p_s^{n_s}$ be the prime factorization, then 
   $$
   \mathbb{Z}/m\mathbb{Z} \cong \mathbb{Z}/p_1^{n_1}\mathbb{Z}\oplus\cdots\oplus\mathbb{Z}/p_s^{n_s}\mathbb{Z}
   $$

​	Given $G$, $\{p_1^{n_1}, \dots, p_s^{n_s}\}$ is uniquely determined by $G$ and it is called the elementary divisors.

# Homology

## Introduction

In this section, the goal is to explain the Euler theorem. And we are going to study the following three types of homology.

1. Simplicial Homology

   The idea of simplicial homology is to decompose the topological space using triangulation. This method is easier for computation, but it causes difficulties in developing the theory.

2. Cellular Homology

   Compute the Homology group using CW-complex.

3. Singular Homology

   It is easier to develop the theory of Homology using the topological space directly, but it is challenging to do the computation using singular homology.

The relations among the spaces are
$$
\{\text{Triangulizable Space}\} \subset \{\Delta-\text{complex}\} \subset \{\text{CW-complex}\} \subset \{\text{Topological Space}\}
$$

## Simplicial Homology

The goal of homology and the fundamental group are similar; both are looking for the hole in the topological space. That is both are looking for killing the trivial paths and highlight the non-trivial ways. To establish this goal, the whole group uses homotopy and homology using the combinatorial information of the topological space, such as triangulating the space distance.

### Simplex and Complex

### Chain, Cycle, Boundary

### Homological Algebra

### Relative Simplicial Homology

## Singular Homology

### Homotopy Invariance of Singular Homology

### Relative Singular Homology

### Excision theorem

### Relation with Simplicial Homology

### Application

### Eilenberg-Steenrod Axiom

## Cellular Homology

### CW-Complex

### Cellular Homology

### Eular-Poincare Formula





